add transaction_data (#197)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

This specification enables the Verifier to send both Presentation Definition JSON object and Client Metadata JSON object by value or by reference.

Additional request parameters, other than those defined in this section, MAY be defined and used, as described in [@!RFC6749].
The Wallet MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters, other than the `transaction_data` parameter.

> The wallets that do not support the `transaction_data` parameter MUST reject requests that contain it.

Reviewer: why is this in this paragraph and not in the new parameters section?

Author: because this is about extensibility. the previous sentence says ignore if you don't recognize a parameter, and the next sentence says, but for one specific `transaction_data` parameter, do not ignore (ie the rule in the previous sentence does not apply)

Author: i can clarify this

> The Wallet MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters, other than the `transaction_data` parameter.
> The wallets that do not support the `transaction_data` parameter MUST reject requests that contain it.

Author: ```suggestion
The Wallet MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters, other than the `transaction_data` parameter.
One exception to this rule is `transaction_data` parameter, and the wallets that do not support this parameter MUST reject requests that contain it.
```

If the Verifier set the `request_uri_method` parameter value to `post` and there is no other means to convey its capabilities to the Wallet, it SHOULD add the `client_metadata` parameter to the Authorization Request. 
This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request. If the Verifier uses the `client_id_scheme` parameter in the Request Object, it MUST also add the same `client_id_scheme` value in the Authorization Request. 

`transaction_data`: 

> : OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: I have a feeling there's an unintended consequence here between this PR (if merged after 1.0) and the extensibility PR.

I think this language says "a wallet MUST fail a request that includes a `transaction_data` if it doesn't support transaction data". But the other PR says "wallets supporting 1.0 of this spec must accept requests that contain unknown elements, including `transaction_data`.

I think we need the first behaviour - i.e. particularly when using the browser api, a wallet that doesn't support transaction_data must never say it can satisfy a request that contains transaction_data.

If we agree on that, then I can see two solutions:

1. We add `transaction_data` to 1.0 with language like "wallets MUST reject claims that contain this element".
2. We add something like '[crit](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7515#section-4.1.11)', but for the body, define that in 1.0, and when 1.1 comes along with transaction_data support then verifiers that want to use it are required to include `"crit": [ "transaction_data" ]` in the request payload.

Author: > I think we need the first behaviour - i.e. particularly when using the browser api, a wallet that doesn't support transaction_data must never say it can satisfy a request that contains transaction_data.

I think we already have a statement like your first option? but I can clarify extensibility sentence does not apply to transaction data

Author: tried to clarify in this commit https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/197/commits/3672f78a6d9211ba8d162e163d90e3a2deefeadd

    * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.

>     * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange).

Reviewer 3: adding one little generalization to the generalization you did (thanks for that generalization btw) 
```suggestion
    * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (e.g., Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange).
```

If the Verifier set the `request_uri_method` parameter value to `post` and there is no other means to convey its capabilities to the Wallet, it SHOULD add the `client_metadata` parameter to the Authorization Request. 
This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request. If the Verifier uses the `client_id_scheme` parameter in the Request Object, it MUST also add the same `client_id_scheme` value in the Authorization Request. 

> `transaction_data`: 

Reviewer 4: Hi,
questions:

a) Is transaction data different from a consent?
b) Transaction data needs to be displayed to the end user, except if it's a M2M exchange. Keeping it generic, can lead to implementation issues. Should at least "display" or similar parameter be defined?
c) Should the RAR or PE (presentation definition?) syntax be reused? (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9396#name-authorization-request)
d) Explicit yes/no: default mode is that the user must authorise all actions, or the transaction fails? 
e) If user declines 1 action, should it be recorded?
f) Is there a need for more elaborate transactions, such as conditional statements (e.g., you must answer all, you must answer to some of the questions), supporting multiple options (e.g., do you want to tip 5, 10 or 20%)? Or for QES: select a signature profile (e.g., advanced, qualified).

We introduced something similar about 2 years ago for our B2B/M2M VP exchange (https://hub.ebsi.eu/conformance/learn/verifiable-presentation-exchange#service-to-service-token-flow). We defined a simple key:value approach where, where key is a scope, and value is a VP definition. I believe this matches your definition of transaction_data. In our model, for a given action all conditions must be fulfilled, no conditional statements, no multiple options (like tipping). 

Thank you!

Author: Hi Alen,
a) transaction data is about authorization. the end user agrees to authorize a certain transaction (payments, QES, etc.)
b), c), f) specific details of transaction data are left to the experts of each use-case. so they will not be defined in openid4vp
d) yes, there is not partial succcess. we agreed to make that clearer. I just have not reflected in the PR text yet..
e) recorded where? in the wallet? according to eidas regulation, i think so?

I will look at the pointer! thank you!

Author: ok, how RP records is probably out of scope of this PR.
I am not sure there is any specific change for the PR requested? resolving for now. please feel free to open issue(s) if anything is not addressed

> : OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a Base64url encoded object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST refuse to process any unknown transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: > The Wallet MUST refuse to process any unknown transaction data type

This makes it hard when you don't know up front what a wallet might support or if we want to define new signing mechanisms and have a transition periods where verifiers can send both.

I think we need to clarify 'MUST refuse' too (it could be interpreted as 'ignore' or as 'return an error').

Perhaps:

 "The wallet MUST return an error unless it supports at least one of the transaction data types"?

Author: we said that either wallet fulfills all requirements in transaction data, or none, so it would probably be more appropriate to say "The wallet MUST return an error unless it supports all of the transaction data types"

Author: ```suggestion
: OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:
```

we actually use `base64url encoded` throughout the text.

> * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification.

Author: ```suggestion
* `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.
```

> * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest indenting this and the next line (adding 4 spaces before the `*`) just to make it clearer they belong to the transaction data definition.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.
```

> * `input_descriptor_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an Input Descriptor that identifies a request for a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to.

Reviewer 3: with the likely coming of the new query language (i.e., #220), do we want to further ingrain the usage of input descriptor at this point?

Author: depends on the timeline, I guess? if query language PR gets merged first, we probably need to add another parameter here.

Reviewer 3: yeah, fair point. I was thinking in the other direction though. And knowing how darn hard it is to remove things once they are in, I'd suggest removing this and leaving it implicit for the initial support of the feature.

Author: we will need `input_desscriptor_id` as long as presentation exchange is in the specification and we do not have an agreement/timeline to remove presentation exchange, yet until we have that, this kind of parameter is needed for interoperability. and from a priority perspective, transaction data is higher than a new query language right now since there are quite some implementers who are waiting to use transaction data with existing query language.

so 2 options:
1. keep the parameter name `input_descriptor_id` and add a new parameter for a new query language with an equivalent meaning once that query language is in
2. rename this parameter right now to be more general so it can be used with both query languages

option 2 might be better and less changes for the implementations in the future

Author: ```suggestion
* `requested_credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an Input Descriptor that identifies a request for a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to.
```
is this general enough?

Reviewer 3: works for me

Reviewer 3: don't hate it

Author: discussed in the WG, since we do not expect both presentation_definition and credentials parameters sent together, so rough consensus to go option 2.

> * `requested_credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an Input Descriptor that identifies a request for a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to.

Author: ```suggestion
* `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an Input Descriptor that identifies a request for a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to.
```

Reviewer 3: also generalize "Input Descriptor"?

Author: @bc-pi I tried generalize - please review

Reviewer 3: thank you

If the Verifier set the `request_uri_method` parameter value to `post` and there is no other means to convey its capabilities to the Wallet, it SHOULD add the `client_metadata` parameter to the Authorization Request. 
This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request.

`transaction_data`: 
: OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:

>     * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `type`: REQUIRED. String that identifies the type of transaction data . This value determines parameters that can be included in the `transaction_data` object. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.
```

>     * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (i.e., the `id` field in the Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange or the `id` field in the Credential Query in Verifiable Presentation Query Language). When there are more than one element in the array, the Wallet MUST use only one of those Credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each referencing a Credential requested by the Verifier that shall be used to authorize the transaction. In Presentation Exchange the string matches the `id` field in the Input Descriptor. In Verifiable Presentation Query Language (defined in (#vp_query)) the string matches the `id` field in the Credential Query. If there is more than one element in the array, the Wallet MUST use only one of those Credentials.
```

Author: ```suggestion
    * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each referencing a Credential requested by the Verifier that shall be used to authorize this transaction. In Presentation Exchange, the string matches the `id` field in the Input Descriptor. In Verifiable Presentation Query Language (defined in (#vp_query)), the string matches the `id` field in the Credential Query. If there is more than one element in the array, the Wallet MUST use only one of the referenced Credentials for transaction authorization.
```

    * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [@IANA.Hash.Algorithms] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.

> 

Reviewer: Could we add an Authorization Request example with some dummy transcation data?

> Each document defining a transaction data type specifies whether that type requires a Credential that is bound to transaction data to be specifically issued for that purpose. How the Credential Issuer expresses that a particular Credential can be used for obtaining user's authorization using transaction data mechanism is out of scope for this specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each document specifying a transaction data type must define the Credential that is being used to authorize the transaction data. The Credential may be a general purpose Credential or issued specifically for the authorization use case. A mechanism for Credential Issuers to express that a particular Credential can be used for authorization of transaction data is out of scope for this specification.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Each document specifying details of a transaction data type defines what Credential(s) can be used to authorize those transactions. Those Credential(s) can be issued specifically for the transaction authorization use case or re-use existing Credential(s) used for user identification. A mechanism for Credential Issuers to express that a particular Credential can be used for authorization of transaction data is out of scope for this specification.
```

: OPTIONAL. A string determining the HTTP method to be used when the `request_uri` parameter is included in the same request. Two case-sensitive valid values are defined in this specification: `get` and `post`. If `request_uri_method` value is `get`, the Wallet MUST send the request to retrieve the Request Object using the HTTP GET method, i.e., as defined in [@RFC9101]. If `request_uri_method` value is `post`, a supporting Wallet MUST send the request using the HTTP POST method as detailed in (#request_uri_method_post). If the `request_uri_method` parameter is not present, the Wallet MUST process the `request_uri` parameter as defined in [@RFC9101]. Wallets not supporting the `post` method will send a GET request to the Request URI (default behavior as defined in [@RFC9101]). `request_uri_method` parameter MUST NOT be present if a `request_uri` parameter is not present.

If the Verifier set the `request_uri_method` parameter value to `post` and there is no other means to convey its capabilities to the Wallet, it SHOULD add the `client_metadata` parameter to the Authorization Request. 

> 
> This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request.

Reviewer 5: I don't think the newline here was intentional? These parts seem to belong together
```suggestion
This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request.
```

Author: i think it was intentional, but i think it works either way.

    * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.
    * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (i.e., the `id` field in the Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange or the `id` field in the Credential Query in Verifiable Presentation Query Language defined in (#vp_query)). When there are more than one element in the array, the Wallet MUST use only one of those Credentials.

>     * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [@IANA.JOSE] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [@IANA.Hash.Algorithms] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.
```

Author: is it possible to add it to your PR, Mike? #274

This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request. If the Verifier uses the `client_id_scheme` parameter in the Request Object, it MUST also add the same `client_id_scheme` value in the Authorization Request. 

`transaction_data`: 
: OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:

    * `type`: REQUIRED. String that is the Identifier of the transaction data type and determines the allowable contents of the object that contains it. The specific values are out of scope of this specification. It is RECOMMENDED to use collision-resistant names for `type` values.

>     * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (e.g., Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange).

Author: I think the intended behavior is, use one of the credentials referenced by the values in the array.

>     * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (e.g., Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange).

Author: ```suggestion
    * `credential_ids`: REQUIRED. Array of strings each pointing to an identifier that identifies a set of information describing a Credential that the Verifier is requesting transaction data in a particular object to be bound to (i.e., the `id` field in the Input Descriptor in Presentation Exchange or the `id` field in the Credential Query in Verifiable Presentation Query Language defined in (#vp_query)). When there are more than one element in the array, the Wallet MUST use only one of those Credentials.
```

    The claim transaction_data_alg indicates the hash algorithm used to generate the digests. If the claim is not present, a default value of sha-256 MUST be used.

>     * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [IANA.Hash.Algorithms] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.

Author: > does it mean verifiers must include sha-256 in transaction_data_hashes_alg if they include that parameter?

`If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used.` and if a verifier wants to explicitly communicate, it can include sha-256, but no such obligation.

> Or does it just mean wallets must support that value?
`To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.` so both verifiers and wallets

>     * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [IANA.Hash.Algorithms] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: OPTIONAL. Array of strings each representing a hash algorithm identifier, one of which MUST be used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter. The value of the identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [@IANA.JOSE] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification. If this parameter is not present, a default value of `sha-256` MUST be used. To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.
```

> Each document defining a transaction data type specifies whether that type requires a Credential that is bound to transaction data to be specifically issued for that purpose. How the Credential Issuer expresses that a particular Credential can be used for obtaining user's authorization using transaction data mechanism is out of scope for this specification.

Author: umm i actually think this one is ok as a top level sentence, not part of the definition?

If the Verifier set the `request_uri_method` parameter value to `post` and there is no other means to convey its capabilities to the Wallet, it SHOULD add the `client_metadata` parameter to the Authorization Request. 
This enables the Wallet to assess the Verifier's capabilities, allowing it to transmit only the relevant capabilities through the `wallet_metadata` parameter in the Request URI POST request.

`transaction_data`: 

> : OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. Each object consists of the following parameters:

Reviewer 5: I am wondering if we should state a bit more explicitly here that there might be more parameters in that object depending on the transaction data type?

Author: ```suggestion
: OPTIONAL. Array of strings, where each string is a base64url encoded JSON object that contains a typed parameter set with details about the transaction that the Verifier is requesting the End-User to authorize. See (#transaction_data) for details. The Wallet MUST return an error if a request contains even one unrecognized transaction data type or transaction data not conforming to the respective type definition. In addition to the parameters determined by the type of transaction data, each `transaction_data` object consists of the following parameters defined by this specification:
```

Each document specifying details of a transaction data type defines what Credential(s) can be used to authorize those transactions. Those Credential(s) can be issued specifically for the transaction authorization use case or re-use existing Credential(s) used for user identification. A mechanism for Credential Issuers to express that a particular Credential can be used for authorization of transaction data is out of scope for this specification.

The following is a non-normative example of a transaction data content, after base64url decoding one of the strings in the `transaction_data` parameter:

```
{
  "type": "example_type",
  "credential_ids": [ "id card credential" ],

>   "transaction_data_hashes_alg": [ "sha-256" ]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "transaction_data_hashes_alg": [ "sha-256" ],
  "example_type_specific_parameter": "some-values"
}
```

Author: ```suggestion
  "transaction_data_hashes_alg": [ "sha-256" ]
  // other transaction data type specific parameters
}
```

`client_id`:
: REQUIRED. Defined in [@!RFC6749]. This specification defines additional requirements to enable the use of Client Identifier Schemes as described in (#client_metadata_management).

Additional request parameters MAY be defined and used,
as described in [@!RFC6749].
The Wallet MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters.

> 

Reviewer 2: It got moved up to around line 250 as it made more sense to have it near the explanation of how to handle `transaction_data` when you don't support it.

  &nonce=n-0S6_WzA2Mj HTTP/1.1
```

The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Request with a `request_uri_method` parameter (including the additional `client_metadata` parameter): 
The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Request with a `request_uri_method` parameter (including the additional `client_metadata`): 

```
GET /authorize?
  client_id=x509_san_dns:client.example.org
  &client_metadata=...
  &request_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Frequest%2Fvapof4ql2i7m41m68uep

>   &request_uri_method=post HTTP/1.1

Reviewer 5: Why remove the `HTTP/1.1`?

>   &request_uri_method=post

Author: ```suggestion
  &request_uri_method=post HTTP/1.1
```

  &nonce=n-0S6_WzA2Mj HTTP/1.1
```

> The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Request with a `request_uri_method` parameter (including the additional `client_metadata` and `transaction_data` parameters): 

Author: ```suggestion
The following is a non-normative example of an Authorization Request with a `request_uri_method` parameter (including the additional `client_metadata`): 
```

```
GET /authorize?
  client_id=x509_san_dns:client.example.org
  &client_metadata=...
  &request_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Frequest%2Fvapof4ql2i7m41m68uep

>   &request_uri_method=post HTTP/1.1

Author: ```suggestion
  &request_uri_method=post
```

>   &transaction_data=...

Author: ```suggestion
```
true.

>   &transaction_data=...

Author: ```suggestion
```
true.
but is this example even correct? i mean, where in the spec do we define that client_metadata and client_id_scheme parameters can be sent alongside request_uri...?

>   &transaction_data=...

Reviewer 2: `client_id_scheme` isn't there. I agree we should remove `client_metadata` too.

<{{examples/response/jarm_jwt_vc_json_body.json}}

## Transaction Data {#transaction_data}

> Transaction data mechanism enables binding between the user identification/authentication and user’s authorization, for example to complete a payment transaction, or to sign specific document(s) using QES (Qualified Electronic Signatures). This is achieved by signing the transaction data used for user authorization with the user-controlled key used for proof of possession of the Credential being presented as a means for user identification/authentication.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The transaction data mechanism enables a binding between the user's identification/authentication and the user’s authorization, for example to complete a payment transaction, or to sign specific document(s) using QES (Qualified Electronic Signatures). This is achieved by signing the transaction data used for user authorization with the user-controlled key used for proof of possession of the Credential being presented as a means for user identification/authentication.
```

> The Wallet that received `transaction_data` parameter in the request, MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below: 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Wallet that received the `transaction_data` parameter in the request MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below: 
```

> The Wallet that received `transaction_data` parameter in the request, MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below: 

Reviewer 7: Why add this to the response and not just to the KB-JWT as defined below? If that is what is meant, this should be clarified here.

Author: the parameter is common throughout multiple credential formats and the only difference is where this credential is included. will clarify this

```suggestion
The Wallet that received the `transaction_data` parameter in the request MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below. Where `tx_data_hashes` parameter is included in the response is specific to each credential format and is defined in a respective Credential Format Profile.
```

> The Wallet that received `transaction_data` parameter in the request, MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below: 

Reviewer 2: I think (as per an above comment) it should be:

> if the wallet does not support transaction_data it MUST return an error.

> * `tx_data_hashes`: Array of hashes, where each hash is calculated using a hash function over the strings received in the `transaction_data` request parameter. Each hash value ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective transaction data object. Where in the response this parameter is included is defined by each Credential Format Profile, but it has to be included in the  mechanism used for the proof of possession of the Credential that is signed using the user-controlled key.

Author: need to more explicitly define either in this PR or in a follow up PR how to include this parameter in KB JWT and mdoc deviceResponse

Author: also Steven suggested to rename it to `transaction_data_hashes` because `tx_data` has associations different to transaction data.

Reviewer 5: Should we directly define the format specific parts in Appendix B?

> * `tx_data_hashes`: Array of hashes, where each hash is calculated using a hash function over the strings received in the `transaction_data` request parameter. Each hash value ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective transaction data object. Where in the response this parameter is included is defined by each Credential Format Profile, but it has to be included in the  mechanism used for the proof of possession of the Credential that is signed using the user-controlled key.

Reviewer 7: Lacks description of how the hashes should be encoded and which hash function to use.

Author: yes.

just a draft text from sd-jwt :)

The claim `transaction_data_alg` indicates the hash algorithm used to generate the digests. If the claim is not present, a default value of sha-256 MUST be used.

The hash algorithm identifier MUST be a hash algorithm value from the "Hash Name String" column in the IANA "Named Information Hash Algorithm" registry [[IANA.Hash.Algorithms](https://drafts.oauth.net/oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt/draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt.html#IANA.Hash.Algorithms)] or a value defined in another specification and/or profile of this specification.

To promote interoperability, implementations MUST support the sha-256 hash algorithm.

> * `transaction_data`: Array of hashes, where each hash is calculated using a hash function over the strings received in the `transaction_data` request parameter. Each hash value ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective transaction data object. Where in the response this parameter is included is defined by each Credential Format Profile, but it has to be included in the  mechanism used for the proof of possession of the Credential that is signed using the user-controlled key.

Reviewer 3: I think I might know where the words "ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective" came from :) 

I know one is in the request and one is somewhere in the response but using the same name `transaction_data` for the things in the request and the hashes of those things in the response feels erroneous. Maybe something like `tx_data_hashes` for this response one. Or because it has to be defined by each Credential Format Profile anyway, let the name be defined there too. Maybe.

Author: good point! I think for interop purposes, this parameter should be defined in VP

```suggestion
* `tx_data_hashes`: Array of hashes, where each hash is calculated using a hash function over the strings received in the `transaction_data` request parameter. Each hash value ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective transaction data object. Where in the response this parameter is included is defined by each Credential Format Profile, but it has to be included in the  mechanism used for the proof of possession of the Credential that is signed using the user-controlled key.
```

Reviewer 3: That suggested change https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/197#discussion_r1709406435 works for me. But note it would also need a change to what is currently line on 759.

<{{examples/response/jarm_jwt_vc_json_body.json}}

## Transaction Data {#transaction_data}

The transaction data mechanism enables a binding between the user's identification/authentication and the user’s authorization, for example to complete a payment transaction, or to sign specific document(s) using QES (Qualified Electronic Signatures). This is achieved by signing the transaction data used for user authorization with the user-controlled key used for proof of possession of the Credential being presented as a means for user identification/authentication.

The Wallet that received the `transaction_data` parameter in the request MUST include in the response a `tx_data_hashes` parameter defined below. If the wallet does not support `transaction_data` parameter, it MUST return an error.

> Where in the response `tx_data_hashes` parameter is included is specific to each credential format and is defined in a respective Credential Format Profile.

Author: ```suggestion
The Wallet that received the `transaction_data` parameter in the request MUST include in the response a `transaction_data_hashes` parameter defined below. If the wallet does not support `transaction_data` parameter, it MUST return an error.

Where in the response `transaction_data_hashes` parameter is included is specific to each credential format and is defined in a respective Credential Format Profile.
```

- The value of the `request_uri_method` request parameter is neither `get` nor `post` (case-sensitive).

`invalid_transaction_data`:

> - any of the following are true of the objects in the transaction_data structure:
>   - contains an unknown transaction data type value,
>   - is an object of known type but containing unknown fields,
>   - contains fields of the wrong type for the transaction data type,
>   - contains fields with invalid values for the transaction data type, or
>   - is missing required fields for the transaction data type.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- any of the following is true for at least one object in the transaction_data structure:
  - contains an unknown transaction data type value,
  - is an object of known type but containing unknown fields,
  - contains fields of the wrong type for the transaction data type,
  - contains fields with invalid values for the transaction data type, or
  - is missing required fields for the transaction data type.
```

The Wallet that received the `transaction_data` parameter in the request MUST include in the response a `transaction_data_hashes` parameter defined below. If the wallet does not support `transaction_data` parameter, it MUST return an error.

Where to include`transaction_data_hashes` parameter in the response is specific to each credential format and is defined in a respective Credential Format Profile.

* `transaction_data_hashes`: Array of hashes, where each hash is calculated using a hash function over the strings received in the `transaction_data` request parameter. Each hash value ensures the integrity of, and maps to, the respective transaction data object. Where in the response this parameter is included is defined by each Credential Format Profile, but it has to be included in the  mechanism used for the proof of possession of the Credential that is signed using the user-controlled key.
* `transaction_data_hashes_alg`: REQUIRED when this parameter was present in the `transaction_data` request parameter. String representing a hash algorithm identifier used to calculate hashes in `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter.

> ## Error Response {#error_response}

Author: this helps with URL to this section being better formed

- The value of the `request_uri_method` request parameter is neither `get` nor `post` (case-sensitive).

`invalid_transaction_data`:

- any of the following is true for at least one object in the `transaction_data` structure:

>   - contains an unknown transaction data type value,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - transaction data type is not supported by the wallet
  - contains an unknown transaction data type value,
```

Author: ```suggestion
  - contains an unknown or unsupported transaction data type value,
```

  - is an object of known type but containing unknown fields,
  - contains fields of the wrong type for the transaction data type,
  - contains fields with invalid values for the transaction data type, or

>   - is missing required fields for the transaction data type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - is missing required fields for the transaction data type.
  - the credential_ids does not match
  - the referenced Credential is not available in the Wallet
```

- The value of the `request_uri_method` request parameter is neither `get` nor `post` (case-sensitive).

`invalid_transaction_data`:

- any of the following is true for at least one object in the `transaction_data` structure:
  - contains an unknown or unsupported transaction data type value,
  - is an object of known type but containing unknown fields,
  - contains fields of the wrong type for the transaction data type,
  - contains fields with invalid values for the transaction data type, or
  - is missing required fields for the transaction data type.
  - the credential_ids does not match

>   - the referenced Credential is not available in the Wallet

Author: ```suggestion
  - the referenced Credential(s) are not available in the Wallet
```

A non-normative example of the Authorization Response would look the same as in the examples of other Credential formats in this Annex.

> `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim.
```

> `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim.

Reviewer 7: Should this refer to `tx_data_hashes`?

> `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction-data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level parameter.

Reviewer 2: The link is invalid, I believe `-` should be `_`: 
```suggestion
`transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level parameter.
```

Reviewer 3: I dare say @jogu is correct in his analysis here.

Reviewer 3: also a  top level parameter in a JWT is a claim so this is a place where claim would be the right term vs. parameter 

```suggestion
`transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim.
```

> The `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim.

Author: need clarify that when transaction_data is used, KB JWT must be present.

Author: ```suggestion
The `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim. This means that transaction data mechanism cannot be used with SD-JWT VCs that do not have cryptographic key binding and, therefore, do not use KB JWT.
```

A non-normative example of the Authorization Response would look the same as in the examples of other Credential formats in this Annex.

> The `transaction_data` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim. This means that transaction data mechanism cannot be used with SD-JWT VCs without cryptographic key binding and, therefore, do not use KB JWT.

Author: ```suggestion
The `transaction_data_hashes` response parameter defined in (#transaction_data) MUST be included in the Key Binding JWT as a top level claim. This means that transaction data mechanism cannot be used with SD-JWT VCs without cryptographic key binding and, therefore, do not use KB JWT.
```
